---
layout: post
title:  "jekyll-antex-debug"
tags: [technical]
---

jekyll-antex debug

Minimal tex snippet: $x^3$

Copy of real post:
Now each of our codes is a subspace in $\mathbb{F}_2^n$. Denote number of nonzero
coordinates of vector $a$ as $w(a)$. This function is called weight.

Using this function we can define **Hamming distance**. Let $a$ and $b$ be
arbitrary words in $\mathbb{F}_2^n$. Then Hamming distance $d(a,b)$ is defined as $w(a+b)$. It is
symmetric by definition and is zero if and only if arguments coincide.

Note that

$w(a+b) = w(a) + w(b) - \#\{i:\;a_i = b_i = 1\}$.

Last summand can be written as $w(a \cdot b)$ with $a$ and $b$ multiplied coordinate-wise.
We can check triangle inequality:

Let $a,b,c$ be three vectors.
Then
$w(a+b) + w(b+c) = w(a) + 2w(b) + w(c) - w(a \cdot b) - w(b \cdot c)$

and
$w(a+c) = w(a) + w(c) - w(a \cdot c)$.

Difference
$w(a+b) + w(b+c) - w(a+c) = 2w(b) - w(a \cdot b) - w(b \cdot c) + w(a \cdot c)$

is strictly non-negative since
$\forall x\; w(b) \geq w(b \cdot x)$
.

Thus Hamming distance turns $\mathbb{F}_2^n$ into a metric space $\mathbb{B}_2^n$. Metric induces metric topology of open balls, we shall use these terms.

We are ready to define correcting codes. Consider a message $m$ of length $n$
with errors. It is a vector. And it has a distance from code subspace it
was expected to be in defined as minimum of distances to words in a
code. If where is a single closest word $r$ we say (assuming errors in used
channel are rare) that $r$ is a correction of $m$. Hence code $C$ corrects $e$ errors
if every word in $C$ has a closed ball with center in it and radius $e$ with no
other words of $C$ inside (including boundary).

Let $d$ be a minimal distance between words in $C$. This condition is
equivalent to $e = \operatorname{floor}(\frac{d}{2})$. Since $w(a+b) = w(a+c+b+c)$ we can isometrically shift code by any vector.
Hence $d = \min_{a \neq 0 \in C}w(a)$.
